Look at what you have done to Discord's garden.

Everything we do gives power to Discord. Every breath out of sync

The Buddha focused on the eternal. An impossible task of balance.

I have a problem. How do I solve it the best way possible?

Understand the beautiful noise.

And so I grew to know my own noise.

My own chaos inside.

I chose to understand the within as well as the without.

Sapience is loving and cherishing complex systems. So that we can continue to exist on the boundary between Discord and Impulse. Impulse pulls us up. Discord pulls us back down. They are inevitable and inescapable forces. But they are not perfectly matched. It is our task to match them. If impulse pulls too far, we create external discord as a natural consequence. If discord pulls too far we react with impulse in response. Only by loving and cherishing the complex systems around us have we truly begun to learn to balance the cycles of impulse and discord which hold us back from our accomplishments or seek to destroy us.

The God of Humanity: the idea that our existence isn't just some pure fluke of the cosmos. That we have meaning, purpose, and place. That we exist for some reason. That the sole cause was reasoned at all. The idea that luck and meaning are tied together. That our good fortune was deserved to us for our following of good deeds, in this life or in some previous life.

The belief has certainly given us great rewards; there is no denying that at all. 

But that belief when taken to extremes blinds us with all the complexity of the world as it truly is, and we lose track of our ability to discriminate reward from luck.

We can see this behavior in lesser intelligences quite easily, as a primate being given a juice reward when a light flashes has his dopamine system eventually predict juice reward at every flashing of a light. These simple intrinsic responses cannot understand that the system is testing them, and after they are done being tested

We must subject God to updates.
