On a Coherent Moral Theory
==========================

Preface
-------
Imagine staring up into a clear night sky somewhere far from the noise, light,
and people in your home. If you are, like me, one of the 4 in 5 people on Earth
who lives in a city you are disconnected from this reality, but the night sky
and the light of a fire were the only things to watch at night for much of
human history. As you are looking up at that inky void enveloping tiny
pinpricks of light, think on how each of those could be a world of as many
possibilities as we have here on Earth. What would those people think and
believe? What would they hope and dream? If they did make it off their world to
reach other stars how might have they done it? Not technically, but
spiritually. What belief is enough to carry a civilization to the stars?

I find this question of particular relevance to us here on our world because,
collectively, we are struggling with that problem and from my perspective we
are failing. A select few of us have convinced ourselves that getting to space
is necessary right now for the future of our species. The boundless wealth of
minerals from asteroids and the boundless space to build structures to collect
energy, harvest food, and manufacture commodities in space would be enough to
provide for every one of us back here on Earth a life without struggle.

This was the dream America had shared for a time, but we increasingly find
ourselves in a waking nightmare. We do not trust that anyone would be so
benevolent as to give us any of that. We see the evil of unconstrained human
greed that leaves us unable to find the good in others as companies force
others into wage slavery by not sharing the profit with those who made it,
places of healing are not places of rest as they take as much as they can from
the injured and sick in their hour of need. We distrust our neighbors for we
have no community in which we can trust they are not looking for some way to
steal from us, to trick us, or nefariously working against our better
interests.

The evidence around us is clear that we are capable of building great things
when we work together, but we can just as easily tear it all back down if we
stop trusting each other. Ours is the next Tower of Babel to fall. So amidst
our fall, if we do pick ourselves back up again, how will we do it?

Beginnings
----------

When faced with a cosmos both quiet and boundless we find ourselves bereft of
guidance. We ask alone "What is the right thing to do right now?" and hear only
ourselves answering back. We ask our peers "What is the right thing to do right
now?" and hear each give a different answer. Should we pick and choose from
those answers they gave? Take the middle path of what each of them believe?
Pick one to trust and listen to them alone? Trust only in ourselves? How should
we evaluate the outcome of our decision? How would we determine whether two
choices would lead to positive or negative outcomes? 

The mind swims with questions without a way to even make progress on answering
them. If we look for answers, perhaps in books, we come across even more
questions. The Western Biblical tradition is self-contradictory and stipulatory,
in more ways an early form of law than a set of guiding principles that lead us
to more correct answers. Enough has been hammered on this topic elsewhere that
I won't dig in here. And besides, I don't want to just yet lose the theist who
might be reading this. I promise I'll keep you included, for now I ask for
patience.

After the Enlightenment it became safer to question deeply held traditional
values. As we dig down into the foundations of ourselves in an attempt to
understand something about our purpose and our direction we quickly encounter
difficulties. We see the void staring back again. A deep chasm exists between
our understanding of a physical world outside ourselves that "is" and anything
that we would like to assert on how the world "ought" to be, as first described
by David Hume.

This "is-ought problem" is part of a long argumentive history in philosophy. I
will not assert its truth, only that these arguments now span generations with
little progress. Logical deductions are made on uncertain grounds, and without
agreement of those grounds to start we cannot even argue within the same
framework of ideas. As a direct response to Hume, Immanuel Kant defined rigid
rules he called the Categorical Imperative because he wanted to establish his
own moral certitude as moral facts which one could state do exist. These
certitudes, however, were assumptions based on Kant's cultural background, and
again do not provide the tools to make progress when stuck.

It was believed for some time that reason, at least, was on safe foundation.
Logicians like David Hilbert sought to prove that all principles of mathematics
could be shown to be internally consistent from some basic axioms of
mathematics. This search ended in failure, because as shown by Kurt Gödel even
mathematical systems can be shown to have true statements that exist outside of
them but cannot be proven by the system as true. That is to say, there are true
things which are inaccessible to us no matter what basis we pick.

And just as we cannot find certainty in the "ought" of a moral truth, so now do
we have to question even our statements about what "is". Much as René Descartes
was considering when he said "Cogito, ergo sum." or "I think therefore I am."
We find the only retreat is back to ourselves.

I have sewn a great deal of doubt and dismay in our search for meaning just
now.  I will turn now to an allegory of our quandry we will use to position
ourselves time and time again to guide our discussion and see how we are making
progress.  In this story, we are a group of adventurers trying to cross the
boundary between our old home and the new home we wish to reach. Little is
known of this boundary other than it is a dark, twisting forest full of
dangers. Predators, steep terrain, and even those who have found themselves
lost in the forest before might bar our path. We set out together in search of
a new home, knowing all the horrors of our old home and dreaming of something
better.

Setting out together at first the trail seems clear and well-worn. Many have
come this way before and we have little trouble making progress at the
beginning. But as we make progress the paths twist and turn back on themselves
until, eventually, we lose the path entirely with the darkness of the forest
closing in on us in all directions.

We find ourselves confounded by darkness in every direction. Some members of
our party insist there is a safe path just a few steps farther. Others insist
it is to our left or to our right. Others insist we go back, that the evil we
knew is better than the one we don't. Still others question whether there ever
was a path to begin with. When arguing amongst each other we struggle to make
any progress. When wandering aimlessly we fail to find any hint of our path.
But the night is long and dark and we are not safe.

If lacking your moral basis is to be hopelessly lost then what of those who
demonstrate nothing but certainty in their beliefs? Surely the person who
marches off confidently in their own direction is better off for not being
hampered by doubt. What does it matter if there is or is not a path as long as
we have a direction?

Let us imagine again a new group in the dark forest. If all of them held such
steadfast belief in their own path through the forest they might not have stuck
together at all. Each leader brash and full of confidence marched off in their
own direction into the forest, perhaps with a smattering of followers who were
convinced by their confidence alone. Does this approach leave them in a better
position than the previous group of doubters?

Without a basis for confidence in one's correctness and a foundation by which
it can be tested setting off in one direction is just gambling. Worse than
gambling, it is playing a game of chance without even knowing the odds or the
rules of the game. Even in the best-case scenario where we are extremely lucky
we can't take very many people with us on a path driven only by self-
righteousness. More likely than not if we started with others they will
eventually separate from us when hardship strikes, having no assurances of the
direction other than confidence. In all the worst cases we are consumed by the
dark forest, never to be seen again.

To summarize: a confident, morally correct but baseless view does not solve our
conundrum. It may be enough for a small group to live amicably together for a
time, but it will be a hard sell to a civilization trying to do great things
like reaching the stars. But most damning, even if we all came together under
one banner for one reason or another we are essentially just rolling the dice
on the long-term sustainability of our views. If there are deep flaws in our
moral positions they will stop our progress as members grow dissatisfied
and pull away or actively work against us.

Our civilization on this Earth is powerful enough that should we choose to work
against each other openly through warfare or just intolerance of each other we
will eventually fail. Either through great disaster or slow stagnation, our
future depends on us succeeding to rechart the course of who we are and venture
out into the dark forest of possibilities that await us. We must be both
rational in our decisions where rationality seeks to fail us and confident in
our choices where doubt clouds our view of the path.

It is not impossible. We will start atom by atom building tools that will
provide us a way forward, at first inching and later confidently striding with
purpose, knowing ours is the best choice we could be making in the moment.

Finding the Path
----------------

In order to form the basis of our moral system we must first define the
assumptions we start with. To name these assumpions we will borrow a term from
mathematics and call axioms. Axioms cannot be proven within our system. We must
assume them to be true and then see what the consequences of those assumptions
are.

We can build a logically coherent system up from axioms by first asserting an
axiom is true and then checking the result of that truth against the other
axioms. If we add an axiom which contradicts a result from a previous axiom
this will prove to us that the axioms cannot coexist with each other and one
must be removed. This is so important an assumption about logical coherence we
will call this Axiom 0.

Axiom 0 (English)
```
A formal moral system cannot be based on contradictory axioms.
```

Mathematical Interlude 1.

	We will denote this symbolically with this statement:

	Axiom 0 (Set Notation)
	```
	1: {A}
	2: {~A}
	3: {A}∩{~A}->{} 
	```
	
	I am introducing this notation so that I can be as clear as possible
	when expounding on details which would have previously used English to
	explain. The purpose is not to confound you, but to be rigorous in
	places where rigor will be demanded. I will make a promise to you that
	you can follow the language and ignore these mathematical interludes if
	you want and still hear the whole story. The math is here to make clear
	what details language sometimes obscure.
	
	The reading of these symbols is as follows:
	
	In step 1 we define a set of possibilities called A.
	In step 2 we define a set of possibilities which negate A called ~A.
	In step 3 we define that the intersection ∩ of two sets with contradicting
	possibilties is the empty set {} and has no remaining possibilities.
	
	What does being this clear buy us? I'll provide evidence right now!
	What we saw just in defining step-by-step our 0th Axiom we find it is
	actually a collection of assumptions about the divisible nature of our
	logical world. Let's go over all the concepts we had to bring in just
	to formally define what you may have taken for granted: that
	contradictions should not exist in logic.
	
	In the first step which we'll call 0.1, we need to assume that there is
	indeed a set of moral possibilities {A}. I could have easily picked a
	different symbol for this and we will see that it results in more
	conclusions if we do.  I will now instead call this symbol {A}≡ 1. In
	step 0.2 I will redefine as {~A}≡ -1. In step 0.3 I will change the ∩
	operator to a + operator, the -> symbol to the = symbol, and redefine
	{}≡ 0. Finally I will insert step 0.0 to complete our definitions. We
	result in the following modified Axiom 0:

	Axiom 0 (Ternary Notation)
	0: 0
	1: 1
	2: -1
	3: 1 + -1 = 0

	In our new notation we've made it clear that our first axiom requires
	at least three numerical states and one operation between those states.
	I find this result to already be quite elucidating that the concept of
	logical consistency assumes a ternary relationship between sets within
	it.

Now that we have explicitly laid out that we assume our system does not
contradict itself we need a way of proposing

Therefore, we can build a minimal set of axioms which form
truths together we will also borrow terminology from mathematics and call
theorems.

I hear you asking "If we must assume the truth of an axiom about morality how
can this get us closer to the truth?" Indeed, if we were simply to assert
something to be true the contradiction of that truth is to simply assert that
it is false instead. Therefore our path is to show that we can come to a
multitude of conclusions from very few axioms and, moreover, we pick axioms
that at an intuitive level we feel must be true.


Guiding position:

Morality bounds optimization.

Unbounded optimization toward a local environment results in inflexibility in
adaption to updates in that environment. An optimal but inflexible system
breaks instead of adapts when its environment changes too far from its optimal
point.

All optimality searches result in local maxima. Multiple, diverse paths through
optimality critera create more opportunities to discover higher local maxima.
